Some notes that I have about this:

   PSICQUIC is planned as a common web service API for all
   participating databases. Matthias Oesterheld demonstrated an initial
   schema for this tool, based on the HOBIT experience of document
   style web services. As previously discussed, this will be a leveled
   service with Level 1 supporting simple queries such as get all
   interactions by organism (TaxID), by interaction property, by
   experiment property or by protein list. All attending databases
   would be capable of supporting a cpath implementation of this model,
   others may need a wrapper web service. It was decided to change
   protein list to interactor properties and extend the search to
   encompass short name, aliases and cross-reference. Searching by
   TaxID would encompass all children of the term used. Negative
   interactions would not be searched in initial implementations. Level
   2 could incorporate more complex queries and feature properties
   searched by both !InterPro cross-reference or MI type.

   Returns would be in a document, the maximum length of section
   returned could be set by the operator, by generating a start index
   and length. An additional method on the web server could then
   retrieve the desired number of interactions in batches. A test
   procedure could pick out specified entry numbers allowing the user
   to skip large datasets. The possibility of adding a flag to the
   query to give the option of a URL at which a compressed complete
   file could be accessed was also discussed.  

   Complex queries would not be too difficult to establish, however
   may prove too great a server load.  It was decided that both levels
   would be published simultaneously, with Level 2 being completely
   backwards compatible. Implementers may then decide which level to
   install. The first query will send a user query. The return will
   include a query ID and the number of results. A retrieval function
   will detail query ID, count, start index and length. Query send may
   be adjusted to size of client server. Standard error messages will
   be incorporated. An initial implantation should be available late 2005.

= Comments =

== First Draft by Lukasz ==

Michael: STRING and also IntAct may have many, many interactions for any given query, so a "give me ''all'' interactions" query isn't feasible. STRING has the notion of confidence levels that could be used as a cut-off, but I think this is too specific for a common query interface. So perhaps it would make sense to add two parameters: limit and offset, with defaults set to something reasonable (e.g. 25 and 0).
